# Navigating ambiguity

## INTRAN + location
(updated 230515)

Intransitive verbs often require an obligatory advervial argument, which typically answers a question like 'Where is/was X' (Biber et al., 1999, pp. 141-145). We will treat these patterns similarly to copular verbs (e.g., *I am in a room*), thus assigning the ATTR tag. The following are some example sentences.
```
- I live in Okinawa.
- Three bomb victims were still in St Bartholomev's Hospital last night.
```


## CAUS_MOT vs. TRAN_RES

CAUS_MOT typically contains a non-stative verb and **a directional phrase**.

The following are some example sentences (Goldberg, 1995, p.152)
```
- They laughed the poor guy out of the room.
- Frank sneezed the tissue off the table.
- Mary urged Bill into the house.
- Sue let the water out of the bathtub.
- Sam helped him into the car.
- They sprayed the paint onto the wall.
```

CAUS_MOT is associated with a category of related verb senses (Goldberg, 1995, pp. 161-162)
1. X CAUSES Y to MOVE Z
```
- Frank pushed it into the box.
- Frank kicked the dog into the bathroom.
- Frank sneezed the tissue off the nightstand.
- Sam shoved it into the carton.
- Pat crammed the pennies into the jar.
```

2. Sometimes the construction can be related to force-dynamic verbs (Talmy 1985b) that encode a communicative verb.
(In this case, the motion ins not strictly entailed.)
```
- Sam ordered him out of the house.
- Sam asked him into the room.
- Sam invited him out to her cabin.
- Sam beckoned him into the room.
- Sam urged him into the room.
- Sam sent him to the market.
```

3. X ENABLES Y to MOVE Z: This class includes force-dynamic verbs that encode the removal of a barrier.
```
- Sam allowed Bob out of the room.
- Sam let Bill into the room.
- Sam freed the bird out of the cage.
```

4. X PREVENTS Y from MOVING Z: This class imposes a barrier, causing the patient to stay in a location.
```
- Harry locked Joe into the bathroom.
- He kept her at arm's length.
- Sam barricaded him out of the room.
```

5. X HELPS Y to MOVE Z: This case involves ongoing assistance to move in a certain direction.
```
- Sam helped him into a car.
- Sam assisted her out of the room.
- Sam guided him through the terrain.
- Sam showed him into the livingroom.
- Sam walked him to the car.
```

In TRAN_RES constructions, a non-stative verb is typically accompanied by a patient argument that experiences a change of state due to the verb's action (Boas, 2002). 
- If the change in state pertains solely to **a change of location**, CAUS_MOT will be assigned. 
- However, if a prepositional phrase is present and describes **a change of state**, then TRAN_RES will be assigned.
- We will categorize lexically causative verbs, such as *make*, *have*, and *let*, as TRAN_RES.

The following are some example sentences (Boas, 2002; Goldberg, 1995).

```
- Claire painted the house red.
- Pat broke the vase (in)to pieces. (check)
- Chris drank himself silly.
- Carol danced Jim tired.
- Rachel swept the floor clean.
- He wiped the table clean.
- He talked himself blue in the face.
- She coughed herself sick.
- She slept herself sober.
- He made the metal safe.
- He made her a queen.
```

## DITRAN vs. CAUS_MOT 

### Dative alternation
(updated 230508)

One of the questions is how to treat cases involving dative alternation (i.e., the alternation between a prepositional indirect-object construction (e.g., *I gave the book to him*) and a double-object construction (e.g., *I gave him the book*)). 

The object of the *to* preposition can cover a wide range of argument types (semantically), including recipients (possessional goals, e.g., *She handed a letter **to me***) and spatial goals (e.g., *He kicked a ball **to the target***) (Haspelmath, 2003; Hovav & Levin, 2008; Newman, 1996). Sometimes, it can even include arguments that are not clearly goals, as seen in examples like *conform to*, *submit to* (more likely to be phrasal verbss). 

In this annotation project, we will include every **prepositional indirect-object construction** when the argument following the *to* preposition is either a recipient (possessional goal) or a spacial goal, and tag it as a **CAUS_MOT**.

## verb "enter" + location
(updated 230525)
This should get INTRAN_MOT tag, because we have a theme as a subject and a destination after the verb.

```
- enter the classroom
- reach the summit
- approach the city
- visit the museum
```

## Inverted/Fronted word order

### Fronted theme (theme+agent+verb+recipient)
e.g., (# text = I am writing to reply **your letter you wrote me** on 10 June.) 
At this stage, we do not differentiate the ASCs that have different word order (We plan to address this after the first round of ASC annotation work is completed). Because we can identify all necessary arguments for the ditransitive construction in this example, we are going to assign the DITRAN tag for this case.
